So we've seen the Widgets page in the wp-admin before and also in the Customizer. And we've seen that we have some default
widgets that come with the WordPress. Let's say in this section learn how to create our own widgets.
So we will create one widget in this section and this widget will display the recent posts. You already
have a widget that does that,
this one. But we're gonna create a similar one on our own now.
And this will give you an idea on how to generally create custom widgets.
So when we create custom widgets we have three things that we need to take care of.
First we need to take care of what we should display in the admin, in this page.
You know this form, the fields and stuff like that. And second we need to take care of what to display
in the frontend,
right?
So let's put this widget here.
And let's refresh.
So here is the Recent Posts widget. We need to also take care of what to display here, in the actual website.
And the last thing is, in the backend when you click Save we need to get the values the user types here
and sanitize them and save them to the database.
So let's start creating this widget and we'll see how to create each one of these steps.
Right?
So let's go to our functions.php and I cleaned the top a little bit.
I created separate files for the images and the content width
and also the portfolio and the delete post link.
Let's create a new file now in the lib. And let's call it most-recent-widget.php.
And let's include this file here.
And inside of this file we will create our widget. So let's open PHP tag. And to create a new widget we use
actions. So "add_action()" and the action that we'll have to use is called "widgets_init".
And then let's give it a function "_themename_register_most_recent_widget".
And let's create this function.
And inside of this function we'll call another function called register_widget().
And it takes a "widget class".
So what's a widget class?
It's a PHP class that will be responsible for displaying the widget and saving the values and so
on.
So we will creating this PHP class in this page and we will call it "Most_Recent_Widget".
It's also better if you prefix the class name like so.
But it's a convention that class names will start with a capital letter.
So if we add "_themename" here and then we build our theme,
this will be replaced with the "firsttheme" and it's not capital.
So it's not wrong but if you want to, you know, stick to the convention and make this capital, maybe you
can add in the gulp, in the package.json, another name here maybe "capitalname" or something. And then
add another prefix and then in your gulp
tasks you can replace this prefix as well. But now I'm not gonna do that.
I think you can do it on your own.
So let's carry on. Now let's create this class. So "class " and our name. And we have to extend a WordPress class called WP_
WP_Widget.
Right?
So this way we will get all the widget functionality like the drag and drop and stuff like that.
And a lot of things actually we don't have to get into details but you should know that you have to
extend this class. Next what we have to do is define our constructor.
So "public function"
and it's called "__construct".
And inside of this function we will call the construct() function of the parent of the WP_Widget.
If you are good in PHP you already know what I'm doing but. And if not it's not, you know, very important
to know all the details.
You can just know how to define your widget,
right?
So now we are calling the construct method in the WP_Widget and inside of this call we will define
some arguments.
So the first one is an ID for your widget. So let's call it "_themename_mst_recent_widget".
The second is the name that will appear in the Admin Page.
So it should be escaped and translated.
So let's say "Recent Posts" and of course our text domain.
And finally we have an array of some extra information like a "description", also escaped and translated.
And let's just type any.
So that's it for the construct().
Let's now take a look at the wp-admin the Widgets page.
And now we should have our widget.
Here it is.
Recent Posts and "some description".
So let's add it to any, let's add it to the primary sidebar.
And as you can see there are no options for this widget.
So how do we display a form here with some, you know, some fields and options.
We will add another method in the class. And this one is called, it's a public function, and it's called
form().
I think we have a typo here.
So let's echo something here. And let's go back. And let's take a look now.
And now we have the text that we echoed.
So this function we will display our form and all the options that we need to put in this widget, right?
And then you may have noticed that we have some error here, warning, and that is because this function
should receive an argument called $instance. And we'll see what the $instance is.
But now error should be gone.
So this is where we will display our form,
right?
So how do we display the frontend, here?
You will create a new method called widget(). So "public function widget()". And this receives two things: $args
and also the $instance.
Let's echo something here.
And we have our text here.
So the $instance is same as this $instance. We will see what it is, why we are coding the widget. The
$args
however, remember when we were registering sidebars.
So here. When we registered a sidebar we added some arguments. So we have "before_widget", after_widget", "before_title"
and "after_title".
And when we are creating a widget we actually need to know what are these,
right?
We need to add these before our widget and after and so on.
So this $args, let's var_dump() it, will contain these arguments that you pass to the register_sidebar() function.
Let us take a look. And as you can see we have the "name" of the sidebar and the "description" and "before_
widget" and "after_widget" and all the arguments that we specified here.
Right?
And of course these will be different depending on which sidebar you put your widget in, right?
Finally we mentioned that we need to sanitize and save our fields. To do that
we will have another public function called update().
And update receives also two arguments.
It receives $new_instance and $old_instance.
So let's in the next lecture
start creating these functions and we'll see what these $instance are.
And the $new_instance and the old one.
So see you on the next lecture.